foreign
hey thank you thanks so much for having
us I love the desk I feel very much like
a talk show host all of a sudden I'm
gonna try to make the most of this
you're far away though I know I feel
like I'm here for office hours okay but
um I've been the Disobedience yeah um my
name is Karen I am a general partner at
code 2. I've worked for many years in
different companies I was at Facebook
for many years Salesforce VMware I've
had the great pleasure of knowing Howie
for many many years I'm sure most of you
use air tables so I don't need to go
into very much here but for those that
don't
airtable is a connected apps platform so
think of it like an entire organization
can move as one when you use airtable so
whether or not uh I think it's what is
it 80 of the Fortune 100 use airtable
so whether they're designing shoes I can
guess who that is Blockbuster movies or
helping to make sure that vaccines are
distributed airtable is there to solve
that
but today we're here to talk about how
you scale in the Enterprise because I
know like it feels like just yesterday
we were talking about this that you just
started and now you've scaled up and
we've learned a bunch of lessons along
the way from uh Girl Scouts and boy
scouts club organizations using airtable
and Cal Farmers to now big Fortune 500s
I think it's it's definitely been a
journey so we have five lessons from
Howie on how to scale and how you think
about these lessons as you go up market
so first off let me jump to the first
one we're going to talk about
foundations
so a lot of this is what are the
fundamental things that you need to
build and how do you sequence them like
Mark Zuckerberg used to say to me all
the time knowing the big vision is easy
but sequencing it is really hard
so how have you thought about some of
the foundational work and the sequencing
of what you do when as you've been
building your table yeah I mean I think
um you know it part of this is uh you
know having really clear conviction
about what what the market is that
you're going after
um I think there's kind of two ways to
build a company one is you build
something very quickly you kind of see
if it sticks if it doesn't you move on
and you know some companies can be built
that way right uh Twitter was a hack
project that happened through a pivot of
the previous uh version of the company
um and it clearly you know took off and
worked right whereas something like a
SpaceX of course you can't just you know
iterate your way into probably rockets
that don't blow up um and I think with
airtable is much more premeditated
um you know I had had the chance to work
at Salesforce after it acquired a
previous company I founded and um and
just you know seeing the the potential
of the low code space um from pretty
early on like I think in the 2011-12
time frame and recognizing the power of
like what if you could make an app
platform that anyone could use and
configure to their own needs I think we
had pretty clear
um you know a focus on this opportunity
and then it made it easier to break that
down into okay what are the biggest
things we need to de-risk and so the
first version of our product actually
you know was a prototype purely ux uh
you know Focus so we created a front end
and uh you know I think initially
wireframes and then in interactive
prototype and completely faked the back
end because even though there was a lot
of technical complexity there we knew we
would have to go and build this
real-time relational database engine
um the first starting point was just if
we can't distill the these ux Concepts
into something that's really intuitive
that anyone can pick up and just start
building with then it's kind of Dead on
Arrival so
um we just you know I think we were very
deliberate about figuring out like what
are the key unlocks to de-risk this
opportunity
um and you could follow that all the way
through you know our 10 years of
existence to now you know it's really
about seeing if we can go into more and
more complex large-scale Enterprise
deployments and going wall-to-wall you
know becoming this connected apps
platform where it's not just one-off
apps that are created but really a whole
network of them
um and you know that's the thing we're
really betting on now so I think at
every Point knowing what is the next
Milestone to de-risk the bigger you know
next Frontier of the the company's uh
potential and it's cool because you
probably can see it but then you still
have to figure out okay I need to go
backwards and then for sure what other
steps yeah and I think that that is Con
the the constant dilemma I think um
emotionally as an operator is you you
want to have this you know Charisma and
vision and excitement about what the
company could be right if you're just
always stuck in the here and now and
like what's gonna happen tomorrow you
don't have the you know the aspiration
or or you know you don't see where the
company can be
um and this is probably the hard part
about early stage investing right is you
know you have to be able to squint see
past what what you know a one-year-old
or even a one month old company is today
but what it could be at the same time as
an operator especially if you have to
yeah you have to execute and you can't
be too hot in the clouds and so I think
um I think that's one of the unspoken
challenges of the journey is like to
maintain that that uh duality of vision
and like where do we want to get towards
in five years but then be super
executionally focused on like what are
the details of what we need to build now
and for us a lot of it is just like the
Nitty Gritty mechanics of Enterprise
sales and success and making sure our
product roadmap is aligned to support
the needs of these more really
sophisticated deployments yeah I mean I
think people underestimate how important
executing in the short term is to get to
the long for sure which sort of throws
into this second lesson I just want to
run to
this one I find intriguing where you
talk about choosing your competitors and
making a conscious decision there and I
find that interesting because I think
there's this fallacy that people are
saying well I have this set of
competitors I don't get to choose them
and I think what particularly when
you're creating a category which is
something that airtable has done you
have more say in who you compete with
than I think people
perhaps realize it yeah like what was
your journey there especially as you
thought about like well what is this
category and how do I do that yeah I
think this comes back to this framing of
like you know the short term versus long
term or even like you know the outside
in look at the company so you know
objectively you know investors or
analysts are going to assess your
competitive landscape in a way that you
don't have full control over obviously
you can you know try to pitch your
company in a certain way but ultimately
you know other people are going to put
you in a certain box and you can't
control that in the near term however
you know as operators you do have
control over how you execute and the
choices you make from a go to market
standpoint which accounts are you
prioritizing um you know which uh you
know what types of product functionality
are you prioritizing um to serve a
certain segment of the customer base and
so I think over a multi-year Time
Horizon you can say you know our
aspiration is actually to move out of
this space in our case of productivity
um you know we knew when we launched
that there was a very good chance we
would be bucketed in with at the time
you know it was companies like Trello or
even before that like Wunderlist these
like task management companies
productivity tools right or even you
know Google Sheets and Excel you know
spreadsheets but it was our very very
intentional Focus to not be stuck in
that you know kind of lower end more
tactical
um you know use cases category but
instead to push towards what we believed
was the much bigger especially
Enterprise opportunity around building
real apps robust apps that actually
could scale up very high in terms of
complexity so we use this Con except of
you know airtable being both low floor
so very easy to adopt and use floor low
floor and then also high ceiling okay
and um and I think when we launched the
truth is like we were low floor but like
maybe medium ceiling
um you know and and so understandably we
were perceived as sometimes a
spreadsheet plus plus uh but you know
because we made these deliberate choices
to push more and more up complexity
um you know we've been able to raise
that ceiling and align a lot of our go
to market efforts as well to go into the
the more serious Enterprise
multi-million dollar deployments yeah
yeah I do I think that that and that
changes who you compete with for sure
okay yeah yeah I mean it was for us you
know going from you know productivity
tools and you know kind of lightweight
project management to now really you
know we we want to position ourselves
against the Salesforce app clouds and
servicenow deployments out there so
really robust applications within large
Enterprises
um that now you know can be built in a
much more agile and connected way with
airtable and you had to earn the right
to do that which you did with the other
successes yeah that you went along was
one of those like it was an earning
along the way to have a different
competitor set and yeah that that was an
important part of it too sequencing is
is so important um and you know I think
uh had we launched out of the gates
talking about you know taking on let's
say servicenow it would have been a
little bit ludicrous right like it would
have you know uh just gone completely
um I think over our customers or
reporters or you know investors heads um
because it just the Gap was too wide but
I think that's also where having you
know as the operator the clarity of like
we know we're going to get to here in
three years we know in you know three or
in our case like it took you know 10
years to get to where we are today from
founding
um you know but we know that's where we
want to go and yet at the same time
every year we can go out and be very
very focused about what we need to do
just this year yeah instead of
pretending like we're already at year
nine or ten
um you know when we're not that's
there's this saying people overestimate
what they can do in one year and
drastically underestimate what they can
do in 10. that's part of it so the next
lesson you and I talk a lot about this
but this is your I love the way you say
this shrink your Tam so airtable is a
horizontal platform it can do
anything that is beautiful that is
wonderful it is a huge Dam that is a
feature and it's a bug yep
especially when you're starting out yeah
so so how have you thought about this
given
the Tampa is infinite it is yeah it is a
blessing and a curse um you know I feel
like in in um in my earlier uh uh you
know time starting our table or even the
the company I I briefly worked on before
air table I was always very
um paranoid about not having a big
enough Tam and I recall even um you know
in high school or college when I was
thinking about doing startups you know
dreaming of different ideas
um you know I would always
um you know get really worried like oh
this idea isn't big enough I want to do
something that is like a really really
big opportunity I don't just want to
build you know a small piece of software
for like a very Niche use case um and I
think that you know there's a healthy
um you know basis for that that uh that
paranoia right like you don't want to
wedge yourself into a too small of a
market but I think you can end up um on
the Other Extreme which is you have such
a big Market that you know you can't
tackle it all all at once right um so if
our bigger you know like multi-decade
long opportunity is to democratize
software creation for you know everyone
and in particular you know create useful
within every company that are built and
managed by you know the the line of
business themselves like people who are
actually doing their jobs you know
building uh you know marketing campaigns
or launching products like they're the
ones who should be building their own
apps you know that is even that is a
massive opportunity right um I mean
certainly like multi-dec a billion
Revenue opportunity
um but it's so big that it doesn't
actually give you that much guidance on
where to focus your efforts and so I
think what we've learned is you know
like sometimes you actually need to
shrink your Tam um that sounds so it
sounds counterintuitive it sounds very
wrong to say um I feel like you know
like there's there's probably some um
you know jumbo shrimp yeah like cheat
sheet that's like do not yeah dude not
do this
um but you know it's true and I think
you know in our case um an example of
how we've been doing this is you know
the truth is like we have very
heterogeneous adoption like there's
almost every industry country company
size you were saying like cows and
cattle Farmers um you know to like you
know managing uh you know Fashion retail
companies and like product launches and
so on so I used to joke and you make
coffee like you could do anything right
you know that would that that feature is
coming maybe in the future yeah you need
the add-on espresso uh attachment it's
an upsell
um but um but you know it's it there's
such a broad market like company size uh
segments
um you know the use cases what function
we sell into
um and you know we've already been
pulled into this really heterogeneous
base of adoption like we see organic
usage across all these different types
of use cases but it makes it really hard
from a product and a go to market
standpoint to actually focus our efforts
and make sure we're providing the best
possible experience or that we are
repeatably marketing and selling to our
best possible customers and so what
we've done is you know while maintaining
the horizontality if that's a word of
the underlying platform you know we
always want to make sure the platform
you know is more like a Lego experience
where you can build anything you want
with it yet at the same time Legos don't
just sell as you know a you know bunch
of random pieces they also sell you know
the boxes that have here's the castle
one here's the yeah Farm One Star Wars
you know great one the Millennium Falcon
um but um but you know you can buy these
packaged kits and so I think we're also
identifying hey you know it turns out a
lot of companies are using airtable for
product Road mapping and product
operations you know tracking their user
feedback and triaging that and you know
if we can do that really really well for
a few customers why can't we go and
repeatably market and sell and also
build the product to be the best
possible experience for every other
customer that might have that need right
and so kind of creating vertical edges
on top of a horizontal platform has
given us this this much sharper Focus
um and uh and we've you know we've seen
the results
um you know speak for themselves like
being able to much more easily sell into
the same use case same buyer type again
and again and again and make sure that
our product is actually delivering on
those needs it's just a much easier your
way to execute than trying to be all
things to all people and you can really
say you are the best at this right it is
such an amazing thing to know like this
is and to focus the teams yeah yeah and
it's and going back to the um choosing
your competitors it allows you to then
actually put yourself up against the
competitors for that subcategory so you
know for instance in uh in the the
product operations use case we're
actually competing against vertical
specific you know product planning tools
out there and and so being able to
actually you know position ourselves
against them and really test our own
metal of you know how good are we
actually for this use case I mean
obviously we're a very great horizontal
platform we have all the relational
database and the low code functionality
to be a really great you know best and
breed low code app platform but on top
of that can we be the best in breed you
know vertical solution for this use case
or that use case and I think it's
interesting because you are this
connected apps platform you bring the
benefit of that to what you're now
focused on so it's important where you
started because it has all of the
benefits of being able to be connected
in this next yeah I think and I think
that's um you know this is kind of a a
lesson that organically emerged for us
over over the 10 years we've we've been
working on our table but I think the
best kind of strategy you know comes
from the fusion of you know what's
organically already working like you
know you don't have to go and you know
uh push you know a rock uphill right
there's something already working for us
that was you know finding these use
cases that were repeatably and
organically emerging across our customer
base creating deep deep value for
Enterprises
um and also that you know these
Enterprises were looking to you know
then build out other apps that were
adjacent to it so for instance you know
with a lot of the content production
companies out there
um like Netflix you know there's this
you you know Central production workflow
and then all these adjacent things
related to that and so the idea of being
able to connect all of those you know uh
work streams together with shared
sources of Truth
um you know is is how we kind of decided
to lean into this idea of connected apps
and making that or north star
um at the same time you know when we
look at it kind of top down or outside
in we we also recognize this is a great
strategic Advantage for us right like we
can start with one use case we don't
have to stop there we can actually gain
these Network effects and actually
compound our value within an Enterprise
because we allow the the company to
build other apps adjacent to it and they
all kind of interconnect and work well
together so you know we do need to or
want to be the best in breed product for
any one use case but then we have this
asymmetric Advantage as we build out use
cases around it because you know we just
connect those use cases more seamlessly
together than you would get with
disparate tools or if it was all in in
spreadsheets or um or anywhere else yeah
and you you always say like listen to
your customers like they'll tell you a
lot yeah if you listen and you have to
ask the right questions too right right
so in terms of the go to market strategy
you hear these sort of two different
sides there's product LED growth and
there's Enterprise sales and it's like
choose
now how are you thinking about that is
it a choice is it
what have you seen yeah I mean it's it's
funny
um you know 10 years ago when we were
going out and raising our first round of
funding seed round
um you know we we ended up raising I
think a three million dollar round which
seems like a lot of money at the time
um at a 6 million free so you know it's
a different time
um you know but um but I remember like
all of the investors that we talked to
who were knowledgeable about SAS
um almost all of them you know framed
this as a you know kind of a choice like
are you gonna be more of this like
consumer viral thing that maybe looks
like Dropbox I mean slack hadn't even
launched at the time and there really
weren't that many examples of B2B
serving companies that had like this
product LED virality
um or are you gonna do like kind of real
Enterprise sales right and then forget
about choose um and and I think a lot of
that is based on you know you like most
people whether you know you're an
operator or an investor you know you
kind of ground your mental models based
on historical you know data points right
and yeah you know in 2012 well there
just weren't that many data points of
companies you know that had really fused
plg with Enterprise sales I mean today
with with figma's announced acquisition
by Adobe for 20 billion I think you know
there's more and more validation that
like getting this combination right is
is a real thing and can you know result
in profound uh benefits from a sales
efficiency standpoint from a you know
just a business model standpoint
um so I think what what we've tried to
do is not see those as you know
Divergent polls
um but really try to find the bridge to
connect the two so as a very tangible
example
um you know we've started to experiment
with cold outbound efforts right um you
know in the early days of airtable we
were purely inbound you know just
organic adoption people would pull out
credit cards and then you know airtable
would spread virally within a company
which is pretty sweet it's awesome you
know it's it's like free money like the
people are just coming to you and like
throwing cash at you for like shipping
bits over the internet to them right um
they give us their bits we ship back
those bits and and you know kind of
collaborative form and we get paid for
it it's great but what we also found was
that you know in in some cases
especially for the larger companies like
they wanted some more hand holding they
wanted to talk to a sales person and
eventually a success person and as we
leaned into that motion we found that
the you know the the power of the
product like the fact that the product
was so delightful was intuitive
um and actually was something that
empowered the lines of business as
opposed to being something that was very
just purely centrally deployed and
managed only
um was actually you know still a really
really huge Advantage
um in even like the the more human-led
uh sales or success efforts so
um so finding that that bridge between
the two um and even when we are now
going uh you know and experimenting with
increasingly you know cold outbounds so
actually reaching out to customers that
don't have you know much or any organic
usage of airtable we're finding that the
you know the delightfulness of the
product the fact that they can actually
go and not take our word for the value
of the product but take it over and try
it out for themselves in minutes is
still a huge Advantage so really finding
a way to Leverage The plg with the
Enterprise sales and vice versa make
sure that you know as you invest into
the product and improve its
functionality that you're also
considering well you know how do we
serve the needs of customers that are
doing more than just small you know
small scale self-serve things but
actually managing this at scale
um you know it requires effort on both
sides or in both directions but if done
well I think you can actually build you
know an extraordinary business and
frankly I think it's probably where the
future of all Enterprise software is
eventually moving towards I I did did a
post about how it's the hamburger go to
market where the product is the meat and
it's both buns it was like very
simplified but I do believe that they're
important you can't just have one if
you're going to reach your full
potential for sure find it really
interesting but it's hard again to
sequence it so it goes back to timing
and what you do first and you can't do
it all right off the bat like you do
start from one area or the other it's
also unfamiliar territory right I mean
the the case studies for this are being
written as we speak
um and you know it's it's much easier to
kind of stick to an older model you know
we're going to just do classic top down
Enterprise sales like there is a
playbook for that um you know the the
big Enterprise uh you know software
companies have been doing it for decades
um but also you know at the same time
like I think that model is going to
become increasingly you know uh maybe
not obsolete but just it's going to be
increasingly outdated relative to this
new
um you know product-led approach right
and and so almost by definition I think
you know any any Playbook that's like
already tried and true for too long
might be at the risk of becoming you
know relevant or or just inefficient
relative to like this newer approach
that um you have to Pioneer a little bit
and because you started with the organic
product LED you have the hooks into
iteration on the product connected to
sales that I think is quite helpful as
you connect with that top bun or the
price sales like that's already in your
yeah I think it's I mean I I've come to
really appreciate that both are real
crafts I mean doing Enterprise sales
well is a craft event it is a craft um
you know we use the the medic uh you
know framework for sales and you know
I've just been really really impressed
at you know uh the efforts that our
sales team has put into like building
this Playbook refining it making it
really efficient and scalable and that
is the craft in its own right in the
same way that building great product
that has you know consumer grade ux is
great
um but I do think uh net net like it's
probably harder to retrofit you know
delightful you know Bottoms Up adoptable
or plg
um you know adoptable product you know
after the fact than it is to figure out
how to start with self-serve adoption
plg and then layer in Enterprise sales
so if you are going to sequence I think
it's you know
um it's finding that that plg product
Market fit
um is really foundational and it gives
you so much leverage then in you know
anything that you want to layer on from
an Enterprise sales standpoint and it
helps you listen to more customers
because you totally you have them yeah
it's it's almost like doing drug
Discovery when you already have a petri
dish that's massive and you see lots of
little pockets of you know here's
penicillin like actually taking action
on like you know uh bacteria like you
just have a much larger organic sample
size to deal with and you know for us
like it made the job of discovering what
are the best use cases for airtable what
are the best company types who is who
should be our ICP you know much easier
because we didn't have to invent it on
first principles we just got to look at
it empirically and see oh these
customers are real Enterprise logos
they're really getting high value from
their table they built these use cases
themselves we don't know anything about
you know let's say you know Global
Marketing uh you know campaigns and and
marketing for major product launches at
like a Fortune 500 company
um you know especially when we were you
know uh bright-eyed like you know uh
entrepreneurs just working in Silicon
Valley like you know
um who didn't know anything about like
that world but I think getting to see
our customers build on top of the
platform we had created allowed us to
learn from them and partner with them
almost to see okay how do we make our
product an even better experience for
that and then scale up around that you
know that things that that product
Market fit that's already working and
this leads into our last lesson which is
this sense of don't underestimate the
importance of a delightful experience in
an Enterprise product and I've seen a
lot of SAS products and I think that a
lot of times the UI or the ux is in
afterthought because it's got great
functionality but like
my eyeballs are kind of bleeding but
that's cool it'll be all right and
you've had a consumer sort of DNA that
has been very useful in a real
sensibility about creating Delight
manage that with the complexity of the
Enterprise
it's it's certainly not easy and I
wouldn't even you know say that we're
we're you know I certainly wouldn't say
that we're perfect at it we are learning
as we go I think part of the challenge
is when you do have a low floor high
ceiling product you know you can be
great for low floor use cases because
your product is intuitive and delightful
Etc but the things that you need to do
to be a great product at Great you know
at higher levels of complexity
um at greater scale if you have
thousands of people using the product
um you know and with much more complex
data schemas and you know business
processes and like the types of logic
and interfaces that people are trying to
build within their apps are just more
complex you know it's not even a matter
of it's not just a matter of having a
delightful you know
um you know product experience in terms
of ux it's also a matter of making sure
that we have the right you know
Frameworks and and uh and tooling to
allow these um you know more complex
deployments to be managed at scale right
to prevent things from becoming chaos
yeah um you know if you think about a
product like let's say Google Sheets you
know it's I would say it's it's actually
pretty intuitive to start using
um you could just type in you know
um you know text or numbers into any
cell you can create a formula et cetera
but then we've all probably experienced
like the really messy overgrown you know
uh sheet and sheets and Excel breakdown
much much earlier than airtable does
because we we actually have you know
kind of the app platform foundations we
have a relational database you can scale
up you know a more complex workflow but
it still takes a lot of very intentional
investment from us to make sure that we
keep scaling with our customers you know
and and now can support you know
ecosystems of apps being built within
the Enterprise so I don't think there's
a I don't know if there's a silver
bullet
um there and it's you know it requires a
lot of the hard blocking and tackling of
you know
um of actually you know deciding what's
the product roadmap and what are the
trade-offs that you're willing to make
in terms of where you you know bet your
resources
um you know but but I think that
it's about kind of pushing on on that
tension and not not saying it's one or
the other but really striving to uphold
you know this this um uh delightful
intuitive entry point that low floor
like holding the ground if not making
even more progress on that while at the
same time enabling a higher and higher
and higher ceiling and a bridge between
the two really
um so that you know it's very elegant
for a customer to come in start building
a very simple use case in our table
maybe get a data set in there create a
shareable you know interface and create
a workflow around that share that within
15 minutes but if they want to build it
up and make it more and more complex
over time we need to support them along
that journey and have better features
and tooling to allow them to progress to
much larger deployments and more complex
deployments
um with Grace
awesome well those were our five lessons
do you have any sort of anything we
didn't cover last minute thoughts I
think I mean I think the most important
thing too is it is a very you know I
think we're all humans um and as much as
you know SAS businesses can get
distilled into metrics and everybody
talks about revenue and numbers and you
know uh you know rule of 40 and ndrs and
obviously those are very important
metrics of of uh you know the health and
success of businesses in our you know
industry but I also think um there's so
much human agency involved in the
journey right and and going back to the
original point about like you know
balancing that duality of where's the
North Star where do you want to go to
who do you want to compete with versus
like you know what are the realities of
of today
um I think it's you know it's also
really important to just kind of uh you
know be kind to ourselves and uh you
know and I'm sure everyone in this room
has had like you know ups and downs and
and uh you know it's it's a hard job
like a hard job um every you know every
job in in SAS you know is it can be very
very challenging
um and so I think you know uh patting
ourselves on the back every once in a
while um you know it's something that
I've learned to do more and more uh over
time is you know recognize the wins and
and kind of appreciate uh that you know
we we've gotten to where we are through
the very human efforts
um and very intentional efforts of a lot
of very motivated and uh and
hard-working people
um that are that are part of the team so
um you know and and hopefully have fun
along the way right um because you know
life is too short to uh you know even if
it's a tough
um you know effort and and uh you know
what we're trying to do requires a lot
of intensity and you know it can be
stressful
um you know if we don't have joy and
passion about you know uh not just the
end state but also the journey that I
think it it uh it makes it all you know
a lot less motivating and meaningful so
foreign
[Music]